DOCTOR: Good morning student!
STUDENT: Good morning doctor, let's get started! Can you present the clinical case to me?
DOCTOR: Absolutely. We're discussing a 68-year-old woman who has a history of 2 major depressive episodes in her lifetime. She presented with symptoms of sadness, depressed mood, anhedonia, asthenia and anorexia which are compatible with a new depressive episode. She was prescribed 10mg of escitalopram and was evaluated 2 weeks later. At this follow-up appointment, she reported feeling very well, rising early feeling very hyperactive and with a lot of desire to do things. She claimed she has a lot of energy and is more talkative than usual. She doesn't report being irritable and is able to sleep for 6 hours continuously. What would you theorize is happening with this patient?
STUDENT: The patient's presentation is interesting. She was initially presenting with a depressive episode, which is why she was started on escitalopram. Now she's showing increased energy, talkativeness, and hyperactivity, which are symptoms that could be indicative of a manic or hypomanic episode. However, she's not irritable and is able to sleep, which is unusual in mania, but not in hypomania. Given her past history of major depressive episodes and now a potential hypomanic episode, I would suspect a diagnosis of Bipolar II Disorder. But we need to rule out a few things. Do we have any information that could indicate substance or medication misuse, as this could also cause similar symptoms? Also, do we know if there's a family history of mood disorders which could predispose her to Bipolar II Disorder?
DOCTOR: You're correct that differentiating between bipolar disorder and drug-induced mood symptoms can be challenging, especially if we only had this short period of monitoring. However, note that the lady's symptoms appeared after initiation of an antidepressant, they are of relatively short duration and she reported significant improvement of her depressive symptoms. Plus, she is not experiencing reduced need for sleep, which is a key symptom in hypomania or mania. A switch to hypomania or mania induced by antidepressants in the context of bipolar disorder generally happens within a few days of treatment and is usually accompanied by reduced need for sleep. 

Let me make it a bit more manageable for you. What's your diagnosis in light of these options?
1- Bipolar disorder type I.
2- Drug-induced hypomania.
3- Normal response to escitalopram.
4- Frontal dementia.
5- nan
STUDENT: Given the patient's reported symptoms and response to escitalopram, among the options provided, I would go with option 3 - 'Normal response to escitalopram'. The antidepressant, escitalopram, is meant to improve her depressive symptoms and increase energy levels, which it seems to be doing effectively in this case - as evidenced by her reported improvement, increased energy and activity. The fact she is able to sleep for 6 hours continuously and her lack of irritability also suggest that this is not a manic or hypomanic episode - where a decrease in sleep would typically be expected. This appears to be the typical, desired response to an antidepressant in a patient suffering from depressive episodes and not indicative of new-onset mania, hypomania or another psychiatric disorder. Please correct me if I'm wrong, doctor.
DOCTOR: You're absolutely correct! The answer is indeed, 'Normal response to escitalopram.' This geriatric patient's mood, energy levels, and overall state improved significantly after she was prescribed the antidepressant, which is the desired outcome of such treatment. It's important to consider that her behaviors like increased talkativeness, waking up early and being very active, can be seen as part of the normal spectrum of behaviors too. Always recall, absence of key symptoms like reduced need for sleep aids in differentiating between normal reaction to medication and the onset of a hypomanic/manic episode. Well done! </END>
STUDENT: Thank you, doctor. It's important to remember that an increase in energy and activity can be a sign of improvement in a patient using an antidepressant, and not immediately suggest a switch to hypomania or mania. Furthermore, a lack of reduced need for sleep also strongly supports the diagnosis in this case. I will remember this going forward. Thanks again for your guidance.
